Specware README.txt file (updated August, 2014).

Welcome to Specware!

(NOTE: By using Specware, you agree to the license in
SpecwareLicense.txt.)

Specware runs on Linux and Mac OS X. (It may be possible to run
Specware on Windows, but this is not being actively supported.  These
instructions only cover the Linux and Mac versions.)

Specware requires a machine with about 2800MB of memory or more. (If
using a virtual machine, be sure to provision the machine with enough
memory.)

Specware also requires GNU Emacs (we no longer support XEmacs, which
seems defunct).  GNU Emacs 23.1.1 on Linux is known to work, and later
versions should also work.  (Note: Emacs may be already installed on
your system.)

Optional: For proof support, install the Isabelle/HOL theorem prover
(available from http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/research/hvg/Isabelle/).  The
required version of Isabelle is Isabelle2013-2.  Older versions of
Isabelle (including Isabelle2013 without the "-2") will not work.

If this is a pre-built (binary) copy of Specware, you can just run
Specware by executing the script bin/specware-emacs.  This will start
a new Emacs with Specware running in it.  (This requires the Specware
Emacs interface files, which you may have received separately from
your copy of Specware.  You can always just use bin/specware-shell to
run Specware without the Emacs support.)

If this is a source code vesion of Specware, you will need to build
Specware before running it.  To do so, follow these steps:

1. Specware runs on top of SBCL (Steel Bank Common Lisp).  To build
Specware, first install SBCL (available from http://www.sbcl.org/).
Specware has been tested using SBCL version 1.2.2 on Linux.

2. Set your SPECWARE4 environment variable to point to your Specware
directory. TODO: Is this still needed?

3.  Run the script ./bin/bootstrap.

TODO: Add instructions for building on Windows, if we can make it
work.

Notes:

Errors in launching Specware may be displayed in the "mini-buffer" in
Emacs.

You should not need to install Specware as 'root' if you install it in
your home directory.

To learn about Specware, see the documentation in UserDoc/.

To see a list of available commands, type "help" at the Specware shell.

Questions about Specware can be emailed to support@specware.org.

