<appendix id="install">
<title>Installing Specware</title>

<section>
<title>System Requirements</title>

<section>
<title>Hardware</title>

<para>Specware has relatively modest system requirements for simple projects.
Of course, as with any development tool, as your projects being developed become
more complex, you may wish to work on a more powerful machine. For average use, 
however, we recommend the following basic hardware configuration:</para>  

<itemizedlist>

<listitem>
  <para>CPU: 250 Mhz (Pentium III, Athlon, or SuperSPARC)</para>
</listitem>

<listitem>
  <para>RAM: 128 MB total, at least 64 MB free for applications</para>
</listitem>

<listitem>
  <para>Disk space: 30-40 MB for base system, 10-50 MB for user projects</para>
</listitem>

</itemizedlist>

</section>  <!-- hardware -->

<section>
<title>Operating system</title>

<para>The following operating systems and versions have been tested to work with the
current version of Specware:</para>

<para>
<itemizedlist>
  <listitem>
    <para>Windows NT 4.0/SP5 or Windows 2000 (We have not yet tested with Windows XP)</para>
  </listitem>

  <listitem>
    <para>Red Hat Linux 7.0 or higher (Or other distribution supporting Allegro Common Lisp)</para>
  </listitem>

  <listitem>
    <para>SunOS 5.5 or higher</para>
  </listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</para>

</section>  <!-- operating system -->

<section>
<title>Required Software</title>

<para>Most versions of Specware require a pre-existing installation of <productname>Allegro
Common Lisp</productname>, published by Franz, Inc. Due to the limited number of ACL and 
operating system version combinations we can simultaneously license and test, only the 
following versions are currently available:</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>Solaris (SPARC): ACL 5.0, 5.01, and 6.1</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Linux (i386): ACL 5.0, 5.01, 6.0, and 6.1</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Windows NT/2000 (i386): ACL 6.0, 6.1 (see "Standalone Builds" note below)</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<formalpara>
<title>Standalone Builds</title>
<para>If you are working with Specware exclusively on the Windows platform, and the performance
of the generated code is not essential, we can provide you with a <emphasis>standalone</emphasis>
version of Specware that does not rely on an external Lisp development system. Essentially, this
will give you a Lisp interpreter for interacting with the Specware environment, along with the
standard Specware Interaction user interface, but does not include a native compiler for the
Common Lisp code generated from your MetaSlang specs.</para>
</formalpara> 

<para>If you have an unsupported version of Allegro Common Lisp, we strongly recommend that
you contact Franz, Inc. and request an upgrade or evaluation license for the most recent
release. This is particularly important on either any architecture based on the X86/Intel CPU 
instruction set, as releases of ACL prior to 6.1 had a compiler bug that could cause a number
of problems with the code generated by Specware.</para>

</section>  <!-- required software -->

<section>
<title>Recommended Software</title>

<para>Specware can operate in a text-only, batch mode with only the Lisp dependencies
described above. However, for most users, the following 3rd-party tools are highly recommended:</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>XEmacs version 21.1 or higher (see note below)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Internet Explorer or Netscape Navigator (version 4.0 or higher)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Adobe Acrobat Reader (or equivalent PDF file reader)</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<formalpara>
<title>Getting XEmacs</title>
<para>Before the installation of Specware 3.11, you should have a recent version
of XEmacs installed on the target machine. Versions 21.1 and 21.4 have
been tested to work with Specware. Most UNIX-like systems include a recent version 
of XEmacs; if you do not have version 21.1 or higher of XEmacs installed, please refer 
to the xemacs.org website for download and installation instructions. As an additional
convenience for Windows users, we have included an XEmacs for Windows installation
package on the Specware distribution CD.</para>
</formalpara>

</section>  <!-- recommended software -->

</section>  <!-- system requirements  -->

<section>
<title>Installation Process</title>

<procedure>
<title>UNIX Systems (Solaris/SPARC, Linux/X86)</title>

<step>
<para>You will need to determine which version of <productname>Allegro Common Lisp</productname>
is installed on the target machine. If you are unsure, simply typing <command>alisp</command>
from a terminal prompt should start the lisp interpreter, which will print a version number
along with the greeting text at the top of the screen.</para>
</step>

<step>
<para>Each Specware distribution CD contains a number of installation packages, each of which
supports a different OS and ACL version combination. Each package is located at a path of the
following form, beginning from the CD mount point: 
<replaceable>oper_sys/acl_version/sw_ver.tar.gz</replaceable>. 
For example, if you are wish to install Specware 3.12 for a system running Linux
and Allegro Common Lisp 6.1, the appropriate archive would be 
<filename>linux/acl61/sw312.tgz</filename>.</para>
</step>

<step>
<para>As root, run the install script named <filename>setup.sh</filename>, which will be located in the
   temporary directory just used. This script will prompt you for the location of
   your Allegro Common Lisp installation, as well as the desired installation path
   for Specware itself.</para>
</step>

<step>
<para>When completed, the install script will inform you of the newly-installed
   commands you can use to start Specware. For easier use, you may wish to create
   a symlink to each of these scripts in a directory already in your path, such as 
   <filename>/usr/local/bin</filename>.</para>
</step>

<step>
<para>After installation, the temporary directory may be removed without affecting the
   Specware system.</para>
</step>

</procedure>

<procedure>
<title>Windows NT/2000</title>

<step>
<para>If you have Allegro Common Lisp already installed, determine which version
   (currently only 6.0 and 6.1 are supported). If you are unsure, look in the Start
   menu's Programs listing for a folder with a name of the form 'Allegro CL <replaceable>X.X</replaceable>',
   where <replaceable>X.X</replaceable> will be a major, minor version number.</para>
</step>

<step>
<para>Find the installer suitable for your version of Allegro Common Lisp. On the CD,
   under the <filename>win32</filename> directory, there are directories named 
   <filename>acl60</filename>, <filename>acl61</filename>, and
   <filename>nolisp</filename> -- these are the directories for ACL 6.0, 6.1, and the 
   standalone version, respectively.</para>
</step>

<step>
<para>Launch the installer (which will be named <filename>setup.exe</filename>, in the directory selected
   above) from the Windows Exporer or command shell.</para>
</step>

<step>
<para>After accepting the license agreement, the installer will prompt you for a location
   in which to install Specware. It is highly recommended that you accept the default
   location, if possible; this path has been set as the default in the startup scripts
   that launch the Specware system.</para>
</step>

<step>
<para>If accepted the default target directory for your installation, and have also 
   installed the version of XEmacs provided on the setup CD, then your copy of Specware 
   should be configured and ready to use. Two shortcuts will be placed on your Desktop:
   <filename>Specware-UI</filename> and <filename>Specware-text</filename>, which start
   the Specware Interaction interface and text-only views, respectively.</para>
</step>

<step>
<para>If your copy of Specware (or XEmacs or Allegro Common Lisp) are installed in a
   path other than the default, you will have to change the startup configuration.
   In the directory where you installed Specware, there is a subdirectory named
   <filename>windows-bin</filename>, which contains two files: 
   <filename>specware.cmd</filename> and <filename>specware-text.cmd</filename>.
   Right-clicking on each of these files in the Windows Explorer will bring up a
   context menu that should include the item <command>Edit</command>. Select this menu item to open
   a Notepad window to edit each file.</para>
<para>A comment section near the top of each file will describe the user-configurable 
   settings to be changed, and some example values; please adjust each to fit your system.
   Once these files have been updated, you should be able to launch Specware by double-
   clicking on the Desktop shortcuts created by the installer.</para>
</step>

</procedure>

</section> <!-- installation process -->

</appendix>
